Calculation of age distributions
================================

This page presents and overview of how age distributions in Detrital MC are calculated. Distributions of ages from detrital samples can be assembled and visualized in serveral different ways. Below I describe the different distributions and their meanings, as well as how they are used in Detrital MC.

Clearly, the page is under construction.

.. admonition:: Terminology and abbreviations

   - **Probability density function (PDF)**: 
   - **Synoptic probability density function (SPDF)**:
   - **Cumulative density function (CDF)**:
   - **Empirical cumulative density function (ECDF)**:

Measured age PDFs and sample age distributions
----------------------------------------------

Measured age PDFs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to calculate age distributions for all grain ages in a sample, the first step is to calculate the probability distribution function :math:`\mathrm{PDF}(x)` for a single age assuming a normal distribution of error about the mean age :math:`\mu` with the standard deviation :math:`\sigma`, and with a kernel width scaling factor :math:`\alpha`.

.. math::

   \mathrm{PDF}(x) = \frac{1}{\alpha \sigma_{i} \sqrt{2 \pi}} \exp \left(-\frac{1}{2} \left(\frac{x - \mu}{\alpha \sigma} \right)^{2} \right)

The default value for :math:`\alpha` in Detrital MC is 0.6, but this value can be modified as described in Brandon (1996).

Sample age distributions (SPDFs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Age distributions for measured sample ages can be generated by calculating the sum of the individual measured age PDFs and normalizing that sum to the number of measured ages, 

.. math::

   \mathrm{SPDF}(x) = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \mathrm{PDF}_{i}(x).

This is referred to as the synoptic probability density function (SPDF) by Ruhl and Hodges (2005)

Predicted age PDFs and age distributions
----------------------------------------

The predicted age PDFs are scaled by one or more scaling factors :math:`f_{\mathrm{eff}}` in order to account for factors that might increase the probability of an age being present in a catchment predicted age distribution, such as differences in the tectonic uplift rate or bedrock mineral fertility.
Thus, the age PDF for a given predicted age can be calculated as

.. math::

   \mathrm{PDF}_{\mathrm{p}}(x) = f_{\mathrm{eff}} \times \mathrm{PDF}(x)

The values for the scaling factors that are combined as :math:`f_{\mathrm{eff}}` are given in the input data file for Detrital MC.
Further detail about this is given in the :doc:`section describing the Detrital MC input file <input-file>`.


Catchment cumulative distributions
----------------------------------

Smoothed distributions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unsmoothed distributions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

References
==========

Brandon, M. T. (1996). Probability density plot for fission-track grain-age samples. Radiation Measurements, 26(5), 663--676.

Ruhl, K. W., & Hodges, K. V. (2005). The use of detrital mineral cooling ages to evaluate steady state assumptions in active orogens; an example from the central Nepalese Himalaya. Tectonics, 24, no.4, 14.